- [Andrew Huberman] Welcome
to the Huberman Lab Podcast,
where we discuss science
and science-based tools for everyday life.
[upbeat music]
I'm Andrew Huberman,
and I'm a professor of
neurobiology and ophthalmology
at Stanford School of Medicine.
Today, we are talking all
about the science of gratitude.
In part, we're doing this
because of the upcoming
Thanksgiving holiday,
which of course, is all about
giving thanks, gratitude,
but also because there's
no a wealth of data
showing that having an
effective gratitude practice
can impact a huge number
of health variables;
both mental health and physical
health in positive ways.
Things like cardiovascular health,
things like relationships,
things like mental health,
things like physical and
cognitive performance.
And these are not small effects.
These are very large positive effects.
However, in researching this episode,
I was completely surprised
as to what constitutes an
effective gratitude practice.
I, I think like many of
you, would have thought
that an effective gratitude practice
simply involves writing down a few things
or many things that we're grateful for,
or thinking about those.
Or really making an effort to somaticize
or feel some of the elements of gratitude
while writing out that list
or thinking about that list.
It turns out that an
effective gratitude practice
doesn't resemble that at all.
The neuroimaging data,
the physiological data,
looking at things like inflammatory
markers, other studies,
purely looking at the
psychology and the long
and short-term effects of an
effective gratitude practice,
point to a completely different
approach to using gratitude
to positively impact health metrics.
Fortunately, these are things
that we can all do very easily.
Some of them were actually fun.
You can do them in a variety of contexts.
So today we're going to
talk about the science
of effective gratitude practices,
and we're going to describe what those are
and how you can incorporate
them into your life.
Before we dive into today's topic,
I just want to highlight
a particularly interesting set of findings
from the literature.
This is a study that came out
in the journal Cell Report,
Cell Press journal, excellent journal.
It's very relevant to today's topic.
In fact, we're going to spend
more time with this paper
a little bit later in the episode.
The study involved having
subjects listen to a story.
The subjects are all
listening to the same story,
but those subjects are not
listening to it together.
They're not rounded up in
a circle or all in a room,
they're in separate rooms
or entirely separate
locations on the planet,
or they are actually
brought into the laboratory
on separate days.
What this study found is
that different subjects
listening to the same story,
undergo the same variation in heart rate.
In other words, the gaps
between their heartbeats
start to resemble one another
in response to the same story.
Now, this is very interesting.
This is a coordination of
the physiology of the body
in response to a narrative,
a story in different people.
And yet when they line up the heart rates
of these different people
who listen to the story
at completely different times,
they find that those heart rates
map onto one another almost identically.
It's really remarkable.
We're going to talk about what this means
in terms of coordination of
neural circuits in the brain
and neural circuits in the body,
and the organs such as the heart,
but also the lungs and
other organs of the body,
and what this means for
changing one's overall state.
A key theme that's going to
come up today again and again
is the distinction between traits,
which are kind of pervasive
aspects of who we are
and how we tend to react
to different types of circumstances,
and states, which are more transient.
They tend to, you know, you
can invoke a state in somebody,
a state of fear or a state of relaxation.
But what this study
really starts to point to
is that there are specific approaches
that any of us can take
in order to really rewire
our nervous system,
such that we are calmer,
if we want to be calmer
in certain circumstances,
that we are more responsive
if that's our goal.
So we'll return to how one
would go about doing that.
But I think these results
are just beautiful
in the sense that they really show
that our brain and our
body are highly coordinated
because people are listening to the story
and the heart rate is changing
in response to the story,
but that there is what
we call a stereotypy;
sort of stereotyped
response to a given story.
In my mind, there was no reason
why the results had to be this way.
Two people listen to the same story,
why should their heart
rates be almost identical
to the same story?
Very, very interesting and
points to the power of narrative
and story in coordinating our physiology.
And this is something
powerful that we can leverage.
Before we begin, I'd like to
emphasize that this podcast
is separate from my teaching
and research roles at Stanford.
It is however, part of
my desire and effort
to bring zero cost to consumer
information about science
and science related tools
to the general public.
And keeping with that theme,
I'd like to thank the
sponsors of today's podcast.
Our first sponsor is ROKA.
ROKA makes eyeglasses and sunglasses
that are of the absolute highest quality.
I've spent a lifetime
working on the visual system,
and I can tell you that the visual system
has a number of important features
that allow you to see
things with crystal clarity,
no matter what environment you're in.
So that means if you're in bright sunlight
or you go into shadows,
you should be able to
see everything clearly.
But many eyeglasses and sunglasses
actually short circuit that
feature of our visual system,
and make it such that we
have to take off our glasses,
or if our screen dims,
we feel like we can't
see things quite right.
ROKA eyeglasses and sunglasses
have completely solved that problem.
In addition, they're very lightweight,
so you don't even remember
that they're on your face.
And if you get sweaty,
they don't slip off.
They were actually designed
for cycling and running
and things of that sort, but
they have a terrific aesthetic.
So I wear readers at
night or out to dinner,
or when I'm driving, I
wear their sunglasses.
And the aesthetics are really terrific,
even though they're so-called
performance glasses.
'Cause as many of you know,
performance glasses often
make people look like cyborgs.
These sunglasses and eyeglasses
have the kind of aesthetic
that you can wear them anywhere;
while cycling, running,
but also doing anything
else you might be doing.
If you'd like to try ROKA
glasses, you can go to roka.com,
that's R-O-K-A.com and
enter the code Huberman
to save 20% off your first order.
Again, that's ROKA, R-O-K-A.com,
and enter the code Huberman at checkout.
Today's podcast is also brought
to us by Inside Tracker.
Inside Tracker is a
personalized nutrition platform
that analyzes data from your blood and DNA
to help you better meet your immediate
and long-term health goals.
I'm a big believer in getting
regular blood work done.
For the simple reason
that many of the factors
that impact your immediate
and long-term health
can only be analyzed from
a quality blood test.
And now, with the advent
of modern DNA tests,
you can also get insights into your genes
and how those affect or
should affect your immediate
and long-term health choices.
A big problem with a lot of blood tests
and DNA tests out there, however,
is that you get the data back
and you don't know what
to do with the data.
Inside Tracker has solve that problem
with a very easy to use dashboard,
where you get your numbers
back from your blood tests
or your DNA tests,
and then it points to
specific lifestyle factors,
nutritional factors, and so forth,
that can allow you to bring
the numbers into the ranges
that are optimal for you.
And this is a huge advantage
over other blood tests
and DNA tests out there.
Another feature that Inside Tracker has
is their InnerAge test.
The InnerAge test shows you
what your biological age is,
and you can compare that
to your chronological age.
And of course, your
biological age is equally,
if not more important than
your chronological age.
So this is an important number
that you can get from Inside Tracker.
If you'd like to try Inside Tracker,
you can go to insidetracker.com/huberman,
to get 25% off any of
Inside Tracker's plans.
And if you're listening to this
during the week of Thanksgiving, 2021,
and you live in the United States,
you can get a special
offer for this week only.
You can get $200 off
their ultimate package,
25% off any other package,
and you'll get the InnerAge test for free.
Again, just go to
insidetracker.com/huberman.
Today's episode is also
brought to us by Magic Spoon.
Magic Spoon is a zero sugar, grain-free,
keto-friendly cereal.
Now, I'm not following a
ketogenic nutrition plan.
What works best for me is to
fast until about 11:00 a.m.
or noon most days, and then to
eat a low carbohydrate lunch,
a low carbohydrate snack in the afternoon,
and in the evening is
when I eat my starches.
That's what allows me to
be alert throughout the day
for work, for exercise and so forth,
and then to sleep really well at night.
That's just what works for me.
But it does require
that throughout the day,
I am eating fewer carbohydrates
than I am at night.
And oftentimes I want a snack,
and the snack I want
is usually Magic Spoon.
Magic Spoon has zero grams of sugar,
13 to 14 grams of protein,
and only four net grams of
carbohydrates in each serving.
It's absolutely delicious.
I particularly like the frosted flavor
'cause it tastes like donuts.
And then I try not to eat donuts.
No vendetta against donuts,
but it's not really compatible
with my eating plan.
They also have flavors like
cocoa, fruity, peanut butter.
They're really delicious.
Any ideas you have about
keto-friendly cereals
and foods not being delicious,
you have to try Magic Spoon,
it'll change your mind.
In fact I'm getting hungry just
thinking about it right now.
If you want to try Magic Spoon,
you can go to magicspoon.com/huberman
to get a variety pack.
Just use the promo code
Huberman at checkout
to get $5 off your order.
Again, that's magicspoon.com/huberman,
and use the code Huberman to get $5 off.
Let's talk about gratitude.
And to begin, I'd like to
emphasize the various aspects
of mental and physical health
that have been shown to benefit
from a regular gratitude practice.
There are studies showing
that performing a gratitude
practice twice or three times,
or even just once a week,
can lead to a pervasive,
a long lasting impact
on subjective wellbeing.
People report feeling
happier, more meaning, joy,
even awe for their life experience,
simply in response to
adding a gratitude practice.
The key thing is it has to be
the right gratitude practice.
And we're going to talk about
what the right gratitude
practice looks like
in just a little bit.
But there are additional
benefits of a gratitude practice.
There are studies showing that
a regular gratitude practice
can provide resilience
to trauma, in two ways;
it can provide a reframing
and resilience to prior
traumatic experiences.
So buffering people
against the negative physiological effects
and psychological effects
of earlier trauma,
but also inoculating them in many ways
to any traumas that might
arrive later in life.
So that's a powerful thing.
And today we will talk about
how that's actually accomplished.
It's actually accomplished
by shifting the way
that the fear and defense networks
in the brain actually function.
And we'll get right down
into the details of that.
The other thing that a
gratitude practice does
is it's been shown to
benefit social relationships.
But not just for the relationship
in which you express gratitude, right?
So on the face of it, you might think,
okay, if I express gratitude
for somebody over and over,
over and over, over and over,
then I'm going to feel
better about that person.
And indeed, that is one effect
of a gratitude practice.
That's called a pro-social
or interstitial social gratitude practice.
But there are now several studies,
recent studies in good
journals pointing to the fact
that a regular gratitude
practice can also enhance
one's social relationships
across the board;
in the workplace, at
school, at with family
and romantic relationships,
and even one's relationship to themselves,
which is really what
the subjective feelings
of wellbeing are.
So it's clear to me that
ineffective gratitude practice
has an outsized effect
on many, many aspects
of mental and physical health.
And for those of you
that are coming to this
conversation thinking,
gratitude practice, oh, that's
kind of wishy-washy or woo,
it's going to involve putting
your hand on your heart
and feeling into all the amazing things
that you happen to have,
even when things are really terrible,
that's not where we're going at all.
And equally important is to understand
that the neurochemical,
the anti-inflammatory
and the neural circuit mechanisms
that gratitude can invoke
are equally on par with some
of the effects of pharmacology,
of things like high
intensity interval training
and exercise, and other
things that we think of
as kind of more potent
forms of self intervention.
So if you are of the mindset
that a gratitude practice
is kind of weak sauce, buckle up,
because the data actually
points to the fact
that a gratitude practice
is a very, very potent way
in which you can steer your
mental and physical health
in positive directions,
and that those effects
are very long lasting.
Before we dive into the
tools and mechanisms
and scientific studies around gratitude,
I'd like to just set the
framework for the discussion.
Gratitude is what we call
a pro-social behavior
or a pro-social mindset.
Now, you can be grateful for something
without it involving anybody else.
So the social part isn't
meant to convey anything
about interpersonal
relations, although it can.
And today we're going to talk a lot about
how interpersonal relations
can be incorporated
into a gratitude practice
in really powerful ways.
But pro-social behaviors
are basically any behavior
or mode of thinking that
allow us to be more effective
in interactions with other
people, including ourselves.
Now pro-social is not
just a name that we give
these different tools and
practices and mindsets.
They're actually neural
circuits in the brain
that are specifically wired
for pro-social thoughts and behaviors.
And these are distinctly different
from the circuits in the brain
that are involved in defensive behaviors.
So without getting into too much detail,
just yet, we will later,
we have circuits in the brain
that are what we call appetitive.
They are designed to
bring us closer to things
and to bring us into closer relation
to the details of that sensory experience.
Now that could be a delicious
food that you're eating,
it could be interacting with a loved one,
it could be interacting with a friend
or anyone that you happen to like,
it could even be in your
relation to yourself.
These circuits that we're
calling pro-social circuits
light up in the brain in neuroimaging,
meaning the neurons are
firing more actively,
more electrically robustly;
sort of like turning up the volume
on these neural circuits in the brain.
And the neural circuits in the brain
that are associated with
aversive or defensive behaviors;
things like backing up things,
like covering up the
vital organs of the body,
things like a quaking of the voice,
all of the things are associated
with defensive behaviors
are actually antagonized,
meaning they are reduced
when the pro-social
circuits are more active.
So the framework here that I'd like to set
is that we have this kind of seesaw
of neural circuits in the brain.
One set that are
pro-social and are designed
to bring us closer to
others, including ourselves,
closer to certain sensory
experiences, right?
Because a lot of pro-social behaviors
can also be geared towards
things like pets or food,
or anything that we find
we want to be closer to
and want more of.
Whereas the defensive circuits
involve areas of the brain,
yes, such as areas that
are involved in fear,
but also areas of the brain and body
that are literally
associated with freezing
or with backing up.
So the way to think about gratitude
is that falls under this
category of pro-social behaviors,
which are designed
to bring us closer to
different types of things,
and to enhance the level of detail
that we extract from those experiences.
Now, the existence of
these two neuro circuits
that I've placed on this sort
of a metaphorical seesaw,
if you will,
runs counter to a lot of
the messaging or the ideas
that were put forth in the last century
about the psychology of
happiness and gratitude,
versus the psychology of
depression and struggle
and concern about the future.
In fact, I'd like to read
a quote from the great,
and we really should call
him the great Sigmund Freud,
because despite having certain traits
that people criticize him of,
Freud was indeed a genius
about many aspects of psychology.
But I just want to read you
Freud's stance on happiness.
And this invokes elements
of gratitude as well.
And then you can gauge for yourself.
"Our possibilities of happiness
are already restricted
by our constitution."
So he's saying that we're basically wired
to not have happiness easily.
"Unhappiness is much less
difficult to experience.
We are threatened with
suffering from three directions;
one from our own body,
which is doomed to decay and disillusion,
and which cannot even do without pain
and anxiety as warning signals.
Two, from the external world,
which may rage against
us with overwhelming
and merciless forces of destruction.
And three and finally, from
our relations with others,
the suffering of which
from this last source
is perhaps more painful
to us than any other."
That's Sigmund Freud.
And not all of his writings
were pessimistic, if you will.
What Freud is referring to there
are those defensive circuits.
And of course, he talks about
psychological defensives.
And in full disclosure, I am a huge fan
of much of the psychological literature
and psychoanalysis of Sigmund
Freud and his descendants,
like Young and others.
I think there are strong
elements of truth there.
But he gives you a sense
of the kind of mindset
of psychology early in the last century.
And then of course, was the emergence
of the positive psychology movement,
which was really about
invoking the understanding
and eventually the elucidation
of the neural circuits
for things like happiness
and awe and affiliation
and things that we are
calling pro-social circuits.
So the field of psychology as
a dark and light, if you will,
and the field of neuroscience
has a dark and light.
We have these what we call
parallel pathways in the brain.
And we have parallel pathways in the mind
that set us up for
feeling good about things
or for feeling less good about things.
I think what's really salient
from the quote from Freud
is that what he's saying is our default
is to be concerned about the future,
to be wrapped in our defenses,
and to some extent that's true.
And the reason we can say that's true
is because most of us
need a gratitude practice.
We need to do certain things
in order to feel good and to feel happy.
We actually have to put work into it.
It is quite possible
that there's an asymmetry
in the way that these pro-social
versus defensive circuits are set up,
such that because defensive circuits
are designed to keep us safe,
psychologically and physically safe,
that they have more robustness,
or they can actually drive
our behavior more easily.
I'll give you an analogy in the system
that I'm most familiar
with as a neuroscientist,
which is the visual system.
In the visual system, we
have parallel pathways.
We have neurons in our eye that respond
when things in our
environment get brighter.
Literally when the lights go up,
these neurons start firing like crazy.
And we have neurons in our eye
that respond when things get darker,
when things start dimming
or go from white to black.
The circuits for detecting
darkening are much more robust
and much more numerous than are
the circuits for brightness.
And that is probably related, probably,
to the fact that dark objects
or experiencing looming,
meaning incoming objects and
being able to perceive them
is something that's vital to our survival.
Whereas being able to perceive
the brightening of things
might be important to
survival in certain contexts;
a car lights coming at you at night
or something of that sort,
but not as often in a
kind of a evolutionary
or ecological context as
the darkening of things.
So, I think Freud's quote
and the field of psychology
now point to the fact that indeed we have
the capacity for happiness
and we have the capacity
for great worry and concern
and depression and unhappiness.
And the neural circuit
literature also supports that.
The key thing for today's discussion
is that gratitude turns out to be
one of the most potent wedges
by which we can insert our thinking,
and as you also see, the
physiology of our body,
between these two circuits,
and give a little more
levity, if you will,
to the side of the seesaw
that's associated with
positive pro-social feelings.
And if you keep imagining
this seesaw imagery,
what's really beautiful
about gratitude practices
is that if they're performed repeatedly,
and not even that often, but repeatedly,
then one can actually
shift their neural circuits
such that the seesaw that
I'm calling pro-social
versus defensive behaviors,
can actually start to tilt.
And the little hinge, if you will,
on the seesaw in the
middle can be adjusted
in a little tighter when
the side for gratitude
and for wellbeing and
for feelings of happiness
is a little bit higher.
What this means is that,
whether or not Freud was right or wrong,
whether or not the neuroscientists
in one camp or another
were right or wrong,
we now know with certainty that
a regular gratitude practice
can shift the pro-social circuit
so that they dominate our
physiology and our mindset
in ways that can enhance
many, many aspects
of our physical and
mental health by default.
So we don't always have to
constantly be in practice
trying to be happy.
So the succinct way of saying all this is,
yes, indeed, we might be wired
or in such that we have
a greater propensity
for unhappiness than happiness.
But gratitude practices provided
they are the effective ones
and they're performed regularly,
can shift those circuits,
such that we are happier on average,
even when we are not
performing those practices.
Now I'd like to talk about
some of the neurochemistry
and neural circuits
associated with gratitude
and pro-social behaviors.
Numerous times on this podcast,
I've talked about
so-called neuromodulators.
For those of you that might've forgotten
or have never heard of
neuromodulators before,
neuromodulators are chemicals
that are released in the brain and body
that change the activity
of other neural circuits.
They make certain brain areas
more likely to be active
and other brain areas
less likely to be active.
These neuromodulators have
names like dopamine, serotonin,
acetylcholine, epinephrin, and so on.
The main neuromodulators
associated with gratitude
and pro-social behaviors
tends to be serotonin.
Serotonin is released
from a very small collection
of neurons in the brainstem
called the raphe, R-A-P-H-E,
the raphe nucleus,
and a few other places in the brain.
And the raphe neuron
send these little wires
that we call axons out to
numerous places in the brain.
And they tend to increase the activity
of particular neurocircuits
that lend themselves
to more approach to particular
types of experiences.
That makes total sense
if you think about it.
Have a chemical that under
certain circumstances
is released in the brain,
that triggers the activity
of neural circuits,
that makes the organism, you,
more likely to stay in an
interaction with something,
or even lean in and seek a
more detailed interaction
with that person, place or thing.
Beautiful work from a
cognitive neuropsychologist.
His name is Antonio Demasio.
He's a world-class neuroscientists.
Has been in the game a very long time.
Has explored the so-called
neural correlates of gratitude.
And two main brain areas are activated
by these serotonergic systems.
And when people experience something
that makes them feel gratitude,
even if it's shallow gratitude or deep,
and if it's all the way to deep gratitude,
they see activation of these
particular brain circuits
I'll mention in a moment.
And the amount of activation scales
with how intensely the person experience
the feeling of gratitude.
And those two areas have particular names.
You don't need to know the names,
but for those of you that want to know,
they are the anterior cingulate cortex
and the medial prefrontal cortex.
And of course, these
brain areas are connected
to a number of other
networks in the brain.
In fact, that's how they get you or others
to lean into certain experiences.
Because when these areas are active,
certain thought processes get invoked.
Those thought processes probably
resemble something like,
hmm, I'd like to experience more of this,
or hmm, this feels really good.
And then they literally
feed onto your muscles
via the neurons, making you
happy to stay stationary,
if you're experiencing something you like,
or to move closer to something
that you find attractive to you literally.
So these are powerful circuits.
Of these two brain areas,
the one I'd like to focus on the most
is the medial prefrontal cortex.
Many of you have probably heard
of the medial prefrontal cortex,
because this is the area of the brain
that is involved in planning
and in deep thinking
and evaluation of different
types of experiences,
past, present, or future.
It seems actually that
pretty much every study
of human anything seems to involve
the medial prefrontal cortex,
or at least one could get that impression
just by looking at scientific abstracts
and papers these days.
So I think it's worth us
taking a step back and asking,
what is the medial prefrontal
cortex really do, right?
How could this one piece
of neural real estate
that we all have right
behind our forehead,
how could that be involved
in so many different things?
And the reason it can be involved
in so many different things,
and the reason it's especially
important for gratitude
is that medial prefrontal
cortex sets context, okay?
It sets context and it literally defines
the meaning of your experience.
Now this is not at all
an abstract phenomenon.
I'm going to give a very
physiological example of this,
and then we're going to
translate to gratitude.
But I really want everyone to understand,
how is it that medial prefrontal cortex
sets the context of
everything in your life?
Well, it does it the following way.
You have a number of
circuits deeper in your brain
that simply create some
sensations or they allow you,
I should say, to perceive
certain sensations.
Let's use the example of cold exposure,
something that we'd sometimes
talk about in this podcast,
for other reasons.
If you were to deliberately
place yourself into an ice bath,
it would be uncomfortable,
even if you're adapted
to cold and so forth.
The discomfort is non-negotiable.
However, if you are doing
it because you want to,
or because you have knowledge
that there are particular health benefits,
the medial prefrontal cortex
can then control areas
of your deeper brain,
like the hypothalamus,
to positively impact
the neurochemicals that are
released into your system.
You'll still get a lot of adrenaline
by getting into the ice bath.
But the fact that you are
doing this deliberately,
and your knowledge that
you are making the choice,
that it's you that's
deciding to put yourself
through this discomfort,
has been shown to create a very different
and positive effect on
things like dopamine,
on things like anti-inflammatory markers,
in your immune system, et cetera,
compared to if someone
pushes you into an ice bath,
or if you are doing it
because someone insists
that you do it and you
really, really don't want to.
So there's a very subtle distinction here.
It's just the distinction
of motivation and desire,
or lack of motivation and
being forced into something.
And there are a number
of other effects of this
that have been described.
In the episode with Robert Sapolsky
that I did earlier this last year,
he talked about a study in animals,
which has also been shown in humans.
If you take a mouse for instance,
and it runs on a running wheel,
which mice really like to do,
there are many positive effects
on reducing blood pressure,
improvements in neurochemistry,
et cetera, in that mouse.
However, if there's a mouse
in the cage right next to it
that's trapped in the running wheel
and it has to run every
time the other mouse runs
'cause the wheels are linked,
well, then the second
mouse that's forced to do
the exact same running
experiences negative shifts
in their overall health metrics.
Blood pressure goes up, stress
hormones go up, et cetera,
because it's not actually
making the choice.
Medial prefrontal cortex is the knob,
or the switch rather, that
can take one experience
and allow us to frame it
such that it creates
positive health effects.
And the exact same experience
framed as something we don't want to do,
or that we are forced to do
can create negative health effects.
Now how exactly the neurons
and medial prefrontal cortex
do that is rather complicated,
and frankly not completely understood.
But it's somehow able to adjust
the activity of other neural circuits
that are purely reflexive.
As we say, neuroscience, like
really dumb neural circuits,
they're just like switches,
and place a context onto it.
So, gratitude is a mindset
that activates prefrontal cortex,
and in doing so sets the
context of your experience
such that you can derive
tremendous health benefits.
Which leads us to the question;
what kind of gratitude practice
is going to accomplish this, right?
Because it is not simply the
case that I could take a knife,
don't please, don't do this experiment,
and cut my hand and say, oh, you
know, I'm going to enjoy this.
I'm doing this 'cause this is
good for me and it won't hurt.
Of course it'll hurt,
just like the ice bath
is cold, no matter what.
But I can't lie to myself, right?
If I have some knowledge that
cutting myself is bad for me,
that's very hard to override.
And so, the medial prefrontal cortex
has a tremendous capacity to set context.
And it does that beautifully
with respect to gratitude.
But you can't simply lie to yourself.
You can't simply say, oh,
well, every experience
is a learning experience,
or a terrible thing happens, oh, good,
I'm just going to say good,
and that your body will react
as if it's good for you.
That's a myth.
And frankly, it's a myth
that's fairly pervasive
in the self-help and
self-actualization literature.
We have the opportunity
to reframe and set context
on our experiences.
But that requires a very
specific set of practices.
We can't simply lie to
ourselves or quote unquote,
fake it until we make it.
Neural circuitry is very
powerful and very plastic.
It can be modified and it's
very context-dependent,
but it's not stupid.
And when you lie to yourself about whether
or not an experience is
actually good for you or not,
your brain knows.
So what does an effective
gratitude practice look like?
Well, let's examine what an ineffective,
what a poor gratitude practice looks like.
Because therein lies some
really important information,
including the fact that I,
and I think millions of
other people out there
are doing it wrong.
Most gratitude practices
that you see online
and that people talk about
in various talks and so forth
involves something like
writing down or reciting,
or thinking about five or
10 or three or 20 things
that you're especially grateful for.
And then really trying to
feel into some of those,
really try and think
deeply about the emotions,
the sensations, the
perceptions that are associated
with those particular people,
places and things on your list.
Most studies actually
point to the fact that
that style of gratitude practice
is not particularly effective in shifting
your neural circuitry,
your neural chemistry,
or your somatic circuitry,
the circuits in your body,
'cause you literally have
organs and neural circuits
that are connected,
the circuits of your brain and body
toward enhanced activation
of prefrontal cortex,
enhanced activation of these
pro-social neural networks
that we were talking about earlier.
Now that may come as a
surprise to many of you,
and certainly came as a surprise to me.
There is some evidence
that if there's a shift
in so-called autonomic arousal
during these gratitude practices,
these ones that I'm calling ineffective,
that they can be made
slightly more effective.
So what do I mean by a
shift in autonomic arousal?
Well, very briefly we have a
aspect to our nervous system,
both within our brain and body
that we call the autonomic nervous system.
It's a little bit of a misnomer
because autonomic means automatic.
And in fact, we can take control
of the autonomic nervous system.
It has one branch, meaning
one set of connections
and circuits that are associated
with making us more alert,
the so-called sympathetic nervous system,
or I should say sympathetic arm
of the autonomic nervous system,
but that's really a mouthful.
It's really associated with
enhanced alertness of any kind
for excitement or fear,
and it has nothing to do with sympathy.
It's just about enhanced alertness.
And then the other arm of
the autonomic nervous system
is the so-called parasympathetic arm
of the autonomic nervous system.
But that's also a mouthful.
So let's just say it's the calming aspect
of the autonomic nervous system.
So it's associated with
decreased heart rate,
decreased breathing rate, et cetera.
So we have these two aspects,
our autonomic nervous system,
and it has been shown
that if people are brought
into a state of heightened
sympathetic tone,
meaning more alertness,
then the intensity of the
emotions that they experience
in their gratitude practice is enhanced,
and the effectiveness of
that gratitude practice
can be enhanced.
This is seen nowadays somewhat
commonly as having people,
for instance, cyclic
hyperventilated breathing,
as we call it in my laboratory.
Breathing that's very intense so that,
inhale, exhale, inhale, exhale very deeply
for 25 or 30 breaths.
Then people will sit
in a meditative stance,
or they'll focus on
their notepad and paper.
And they'll write out the things
that they're grateful for.
And then they'll really try
and feel into those things,
or they'll think about those things.
And it makes perfect sense
as to why enhancing autonomic arousal
toward more alertness would
create more robust feelings
or more robust impact of
the gratitude practices,
because in that state, you are more alert
and therefore you are
able to bring more detail,
more richness to the perception
and the understanding
of what those things on
your list happened to be.
And I should say
that there are numerous
other approaches to this.
Sort of self-help type stuff
and self actualization seminars.
People will do things like cold baths,
or they'll do chanting,
or they'll have any number
of different experiences
all of which are mainly geared
towards increased autonomic arousal.
There even practices out there
using pharmacology to create
increased autonomic arousal
and then drop into gratitude.
Across the board, those
increase the potency
of the gratitude practice of
listing things out on paper
or in one's mind or saying them out loud.
But somewhat surprisingly, at least to me,
that form of just expressing
thanks, expressing gratitude
is not the most effective way
to shift these pro-social circuits
in positive ways for one's physiology
and anatomy and psychology.
It turns out that the most
potent form of gratitude practice
is not a gratitude practice
where you give gratitude
or express gratitude,
but rather where you receive gratitude,
where you receive thanks.
And this to me was very surprising.
There are a number of
studies about this now.
One in particular that I
think is interesting is called
Prefrontal activation while listening
to a letter of gratitude read aloud
by a coworker face-to-face: A NIRS study.
N-I-R-S.
I'll explain what all this means.
You now know what the
prefrontal activation part is.
This is activation in
the prefrontal cortex.
The NIRS, N-I-R-S study,
that's just a technical term.
It's a form of imaging brain activity.
It's noninvasive.
So it's kind of a skullcap.
It looks like a hoodie
with a bunch of wires
coming out of it basically,
that can measure neural activity
without having to remove
any parts of the skull
or put a person into one of
these two black fMRI machines,
which is very invasive.
It's also a wonderful tool
because it allows human subjects
in the laboratory to move around
and to engage with one another.
So in this particular
experiment, what they did
is they had co-workers
write a letter of gratitude,
of thanks to another coworker,
unbeknownst to the other coworker.
And then they sat down together
and then they imaged brain activity
as this letter was being read
and as the letter was
being heard, received.
And it showed very robust effects
on these prefrontal networks;
that pointed to the fact
that receiving gratitude
is actually much more potent,
in terms of the positive
shifts that that can create
than giving gratitude.
So this raises a couple
of important points.
First of all, if you are
somebody who is prone
to write letters of gratitude,
ideally I think it's requisite
that these be genuine
letters of gratitude,
or saying things that are
genuine expressions of gratitude.
This could be by text or
in-person or by phone.
You have within you a very potent form
of shifting somebody else's neurology.
Now, that's wonderful,
and I think there are many
people like that out there.
But for many people who want to experience
the positive effects of gratitude,
it's probably not the
most advantageous approach
to just sit around waiting,
hoping that someone's going to deliver
all these letters or words of gratitude.
How is it that you can create
that sense of receiving
gratitude for yourself
and thereby derive the
effects of gratitude
as outlined in this particular study?
And there we go back to the important work
of the great Antonio Damasio
who explored these neural
correlates of gratitude,
to define the areas of the brain
that are associated with
pro-social behaviors
like the prefrontal cortex.
And what's really
interesting about the work
that Demasio and colleagues
did is first of all,
they used functional
magnetic resonance imaging.
So this is a very high resolution approach
to exploring what areas
of the brain are active.
And has very high, what we
call temporal resolution,
meaning you can see things
in time at very fine scales.
So a lot of mechanistic detail,
it can emerge from these sorts of studies.
What they did was interesting.
Rather than have people express gratitude,
they had the subjects go into the scanner,
so their brains are being imaged,
and they watched narratives,
stories about other people
experiencing positive
things in their life.
And in this case, these
were powerful stories.
These were stories about
survivors of genocide.
So that's what they're watching.
The subjects were subjects
that were not survivors of genocide.
So they were watching these videotapes
of people that had genocide,
and had people help them along the way
as part of their story of survival,
either psychological and/or...
Obviously they survive long
enough to make the video.
So, or physical survival.
So within these stories,
there was a conveyance
of a lot of struggle.
These people talked about
the horrible situations
they were in, but also
small, but highly significant
features of their history that had led
to their own feelings of gratitude.
So for instance, it says a woman at the...
This is literally from
the scientific paper.
Somebody had been sick for weeks.
So the woman's describing how
she'd been sick for weeks.
And then another prisoner who was a doctor
finds a particular medicine somehow,
it doesn't describe how, and
literally saves her life.
Or an ally who was also
in a stricken circumstance
gave this person a pair of glasses
when their eyesight started to falter.
So these sorts of stories.
Now just hearing this in the context
of nothing but a scientific
paper and discussion,
these probably aren't that impactful.
What's really important about this study
and is really important
for all of us to know
is that these stories of
other people receiving things
that were powerful for them
in their life trajectory
is embedded in story.
And the human brain especially
is so oriented towards story.
We have neural circuits
that like to link together
past, present future,
have different characters,
protagonists and antagonists.
From the time we're very young
until the time we're very old,
story is one of the major ways
that we organize information in the brain.
There does seem to be storytelling
and story listening circuits in the brain.
So what's important is not simply
that these people survived genocide.
That's obviously important and wonderful.
But it's not just that they
were helped along the way,
it's that the description of their help
is embedded in a larger story.
So the human subject in
this scientific study
is watching these powerful stories.
And the neural circuits associated
with pro-social behaviors
and with gratitude become robustly active
when they start to feel some affiliation
with the person telling the story.
They start to feel some resonance.
We might call that empathy,
but it doesn't necessarily
have to be empathy.
Empathy is a somewhat
complicated thing to define
because it involves
literally a setting aside
of one's own emotions and
really focusing almost entirely,
or experiencing almost entirely
the emotions of another.
It could be sympathy, it could be empathy.
What we do know is that
the stories themselves
were able to shift the
physiology of the subjects
in this study and activate these,
what we're calling gratitude circuitry
that involves the prefrontal cortex.
So if you think about the earlier study
that receiving gratitude
is the most powerful way
to activate these circuits for gratitude,
the subjects in this study in many ways
are receiving a sense of gratitude,
but through the narrative of
one of these other subjects.
Which I find fascinating.
I would have thought a
great gratitude practice
is when you sit down and list out
all the things you're grateful for.
That just seems so logical to me.
But it turns out
that these neurocircuits
don't work that way.
That to really activate
these circuits for gratitude
in the serotonin and that probably
the oxytocin system as well,
and its prefrontal networks,
one has to powerfully
associate with the idea
of receiving help, okay?
The subjects are associating
or experiencing empathy or sympathy
for somebody else who received help.
In the other study we
described a few minutes ago,
the person hearing the letter
was receiving gratitude,
and that would amplify the
activity of these circuits.
And that takes us to a larger theme of,
what are these pro-social circuits?
And an important concept
to emerge from this
is one that's most often associated
with the autism literature, frankly,
which is this idea of theory of mind.
So just very briefly, theory of mind
is the ability to attribute or
to understand the experience
of another without actually experiencing
the thing that they're experiencing.
Again, it kind of sounds like empathy,
but this was actually a term
that's now been demonstrated
in the psychology and neuroscience,
that's been linked to
some very robust findings
associated with brain areas and so forth,
that was looking at autistic
kids and non-autistic kids.
The person largely responsible
for developing theory of mind
is Simon Baron-Cohen.
I believe he's either the
brother or the cousin.
I can't remember recall which,
to the comedian Sasha Baron-Cohen.
Simon Baron-Cohen is a
professor at Oxford University,
or at least he was the
last time I checked.
And the theory of mind
test can be done on adults
or on children.
And we can sort of do
that experiment right now,
if you like, and you can think
about how you would behave
if you were a subject in
a theory of mind test.
Theory of mind test
involves you or a child
or some other adults,
sitting down and watching a video
of a child going into a room
or a person going into a room,
opening up a desk or a
dresser, a drawer for instance,
or a desk drawer and
placing something in it,
like a pen or a toy, and then leaving.
And then another person
walking into the room
and clearly looking for
something in the room,
and one presumes it's the toy or the pen,
depending on the context.
People who have strong theory of mind
make the obvious conclusion
that the person looking around
for the pen or the toy is
confused, or they're perplexed.
They don't know where the toy is,
they're looking for the toy.
Someone who is fairly far
to one side of the autism
or Asperger's spectrum will simply focus
on the location of the object,
on the location of the pen or the toy.
And this is especially true in children.
They will say, well, it's
in the second drawer,
it's in the second drawer.
And they'll say, well, how does the person
who comes into the room feel?
And they'll say, well, it's in the drawer.
So they tend to focus on the
specific factual elements
of the scenario rather
than place their mind
into the mind of the other person.
So-called theory of mind.
Now that doesn't mean
that people with autism
and Asperger's don't have empathy.
In some cases they can.
It sort of depends on where
they are in the spectrum
and so forth.
But theory of mind has very strong basis
in these prefrontal cortex neural circuits
that we were talking about.
Because, as you now know,
the prefrontal cortex sets context
on what we see and experience.
And the theory of mind task
that I just described very
briefly is a pure example
of context setting, right?
It's not about just the factual elements
about the location of the
objects, it's about the context.
Someone is looking for something
that someone else put someplace
that makes it such that
that object is hidden.
So basically theory of
mind is your ability
to put yourself into
the mindset of another.
And in order to get activation
of these gratitude circuits,
one needs to put themselves
into the mindset of another
or to directly receive gratitude.
So let's just take a moment
and start to think about
how we are going to build out
the ultimate gratitude practice;
meaning the most effective
gratitude practice
for us to do because of all
the many positive effects
that an effective gratitude
practice can have,
if it's the proper one.
It's very clear that receiving
gratitude is powerful,
but it's also very clear
that waiting around
to receive that gratitude
is an impractical approach.
Now, there are methods
that have been developed
by my colleague at Stanford,
Kelly McGonigal and others
that actually have developed
things for the workplace,
for school, for coworkers and students
to write out particular
worksheets related to
what they're thankful for
from others and exchange them.
And so those are very useful practices.
I don't want to take anything
away from the important work
that Kelly and others have done.
But in the absence of having other people
to do these practices with,
what we know for sure
is that there has to be a real experience
of somebody else's experience.
And that the best way to do that is story.
So, in thinking about how to build out
an effective gratitude practice,
it's very worthwhile, I believe,
to find someone's narrative
that's powerful for you.
And many ways to think about this is,
it's got to be a story that inspires you
because of the, for
lack of a better phrase,
the beauty of the human spirit,
or the ability of humans
to help other humans.
And I find this remarkable
because what this really means
is that the circuits for gratitude
are such that we can exchange gratitude.
We can actually observe
someone else getting help,
someone else giving help.
And that observation
of our species doing that for one another,
allows us to experience the
feeling of a genuine chemical
and neural circuit
activation lift, if you will.
Very, very different
than simply writing out
the things that you're
thankful for, right?
And so, how would you do this?
Well, people digest story in
a number of different ways.
People watch movies,
people listen to podcasts,
people read books.
There are a tremendous
number of stories out there.
It's clear that an
effective gratitude practice
has to be repeated from time to time.
So what I would not suggest
is that we build a protocol
in which you're constantly foraging
for inspirational stories
over and over again.
Social media and the internet
are replete with those.
That's not going to be a
very potent protocol or tool,
because the most potent
protocol or tool for gratitude
is going to be one that you
repeat over and over again.
Rather, the most
effective protocol or tool
is going to be either to think into,
and you could write this out if you like,
but think into when somebody was thankful
for something that you did,
and really start to
think about how you felt
in receiving that gratitude,
and/or I should say, imagining
or thinking about deeply
the emotional experience of
somebody else receiving help.
Now, what narrative you select
is going to be very dependent
on you and your taste.
It's going to be very dependent
on what resonates with you.
But again, I want to
emphasize that the story
that you select does not
have to have any semblance
to your own life experience,
is just about what happens to move you.
And so, the way that one could do this,
and actually I've started
this practice for myself
on the basis of the learnings
I've had in the last few weeks
around preparing for this episode,
is to find a story that's
particularly meaningful for you.
And then to just take some short notes,
bullet point notes about
maybe list out for instance,
on just a small sheet of
paper or in your phone,
if that's your preference,
just list out for instance,
you know, what the struggle was,
what the help was,
and something about how that
impacts you emotionally, okay?
This is something just for you.
You don't have to share it with anybody.
That kind of shorthand
list of bullet point notes
serves as your shorthand
for getting into this mode
that we're calling gratitude.
And actually closely mimics
a lot of what was done
in these various studies.
Because even though the studies
I've talked about up until now,
were really focused on what
we call acute imaging studies,
where someone watched a
story or received gratitude
while the experiment was done,
and then that's it one and done.
There are other studies looking
at gratitude in this context
over many weeks, up to six weeks.
And what one observes
is that there's so-called
neuroplasticity of these circuits.
Neuroplasticity is the brain
and nervous system's ability
to change in response to experience.
And that these neural
circuits start developing
a familiarity with the narrative.
So that, for instance,
let's say you sit down the
first time you've found a story
that you find particularly compelling.
You've written down a few notes
about what that story
is just to remind you.
And then you read those out
and you think into the
richness of that experience,
that receiving of gratitude,
or if you prefer you're doing the protocol
where you're thinking about
when someone was deeply grateful
or was genuinely grateful to you,
that you're thinking about that.
The neural circuits become
activated more easily
with each subsequent
repeat of the practice.
Now this can be done
literally for one minute
or two minutes or three minutes.
This is not an extensively long practice.
And that's another beauty
of gratitude practices,
is that they have these
out-sized positive effects
on so many aspects of our physiology,
but these are very short practices.
They're the kind of thing that you can do
walking to your car.
The kind of thing you can
just sit down for a minute
and set a timer and do,
because they are really
about changing your
state of mind and body.
And if you have an experience
of receiving gratitude
or a story that's very potent for you,
it becomes a sort of shortcut
into the gratitude network,
these pro-social networks.
Meaning the activation of these circuits
becomes almost instantaneous.
And that's very different
than a lot of other practices out there.
I'm not aware of any meditation
practices for instance,
that you can do only a few times,
and then within a week or so,
you just have to do them for one minute.
You immediately drop into
the kind of optimal state
that that meditation practice
is designed to create.
There are some shorter
meditation practices
that are very potent and
very effective like that.
But gratitude and the
circuits associated with it
appear to be especially plastic;
meaning, especially prone to
being able to be triggered,
in the good sense of the word triggered,
just by simply reminding yourself
of this particular narrative.
Now there's another very
clear and positive effect
of using this narrative
or story-based approach
to a gratitude practice.
And that's what story
does for our physiology.
Now, earlier in the episode,
I mentioned this really incredible study
in which listening to a story
coordinated the heart rates
of different individuals,
and literally changed the way
that their heart was beating.
The title of the study
is conscious processing
of narrative stimulate synchronizes
heart rate between individuals.
The first author is Perez,
again, published in Cell Reports,
Cell Press journal, excellent journal.
And it's a really elegant study.
They looked at instantaneous heart rate.
They use electrocardiogram to do that,
which is simply a way
to look at heart beats
with very fine precision.
They also looked at the
breathing of subjects
as they listened to the stories.
Some of you may know that
breathing and heart rate
are actually linked to one another
in a really interesting way.
The simple way to put it
is that when you inhale,
your heart rate speeds up a little bit,
and when you exhale, your
heart rate slows down.
And this is because of the
movement of the diaphragm
in your thoracic cavity.
And the physicians and medical types
call this respiratory sinus arrhythmia.
There's a mechanism
there we could get into,
but I don't want to distract
us from the main theme here.
So just remember when you inhale,
your heart rate speeds up,
and when you exhale, your
heart rate slows down.
They looked at breathing,
they looked at heart rates
in different individuals.
And listening to a story
produced very consistent
gaps between the heart rates
of the people who are listening,
different individuals in the study
who were not located in the same place
when they listened to the story,
listening to the story on different times,
different days entirely had
very similar heartbeat patterns
listening to the story.
What this means for
your gratitude practice
is that having a story
that you can return to
over and over again, even if
it's not the entire story,
you're just using the
shorthand bullet point
version of your story,
will create a perceptible
and real shift in your
heartbeat and in your breathing.
And actually that's been
demonstrated over and over now
that an effective
gratitude practice is one
that can rapidly shift,
not just the activation of
these circuits in your brain
for pro-social behaviors,
but also activation of
particular circuits in your heart
and in your lungs and the
other organs of your body,
such that you can get
into a reproducible state
of gratitude each time.
So an important component here is that,
there be some element of story,
again, you don't have to listen to or read
or think about the entire
story, start to finish
in order to extract these benefits,
and that it be the same
story over and over.
And as a consequence, that's
going to shift your physiology
into presumably a more relaxed state,
because typically that's the one
that's associated with gratitude.
Although activation of
these gratitude circuits
has also been shown to create
sense of awe or sense of joy.
There are few studies looking at
and kind of parsing the difference
between gratitude and joy.
I was able to find a
few studies about that.
But in general, the neural
circuits that are activated
tend to overlap quite a lot with those
that create a sense of gratitude.
So we don't want to split
hairs on necessarily there.
The key thing is that you
want to use the same story,
even if it's your own
experience or somebody else's,
and keep coming back to
it over and over again.
That makes it a very potent tool
that you can get a tremendous
amount of benefit from
with even as short as
60 seconds of practice.
Earlier, I talked about how
you can't lie to yourself
and say, you know, I'm so
grateful for this thing
that I actually hate.
And in a moment, I'm going to tell you
about some scientific data that proves
the statement I made is true,
and that you can't just lie to yourself
and derive the benefits
of a gratitude practice.
The data are also going
to point to the fact that,
if you are giving gratitude,
not just receiving it,
but giving gratitude, that
too has to be genuine.
There's a really interesting studies
published in scientific reports,
which is a nature research journal.
The title of it is Neural
Responses to Intention
and Benefit Appraisal are Critical
in Distinguishing Gratitude and Joy.
It's a somewhat complicated study,
so I'm just going to hit
on some of the high points.
But basically what they did
is they use functional
magnetic resonance imaging.
So they could look at
brain circuitry activation
with very high precision.
And they had people receiving money
in the context of this experiment.
And they had some knowledge
as to whether or not
the money that they were receiving
was given to them
wholeheartedly or reluctantly.
And there were a number of
different variables in the study,
including how much money was given.
So in some cases it was very little,
in other cases, it was modest,
in other cases, it was a lot more.
And they also varied the extent
to which the giver of the
money, called the benefactor,
was doing it wholeheartedly
or seem to be doing it
somewhat reluctantly.
And they looked at whether
or not the sense of gratitude
scaled with the amount of money received
and/or the intention of the benefactor.
Whether or not the person giving the money
was doing it wholeheartedly
or reluctantly.
And what's remarkable
is that while the amount of money given
was a strong component in
whether or not somebody felt
that they had received
gratitude, which makes sense,
you know, the amount
of money is some metric
of whether or not somebody feels thanked.
The stronger variable, the
bigger impact came from
whether or not the person giving the money
was giving it with a
wholehearted intention
and not a reluctant intention.
And of course, there was an interaction
where the best circumstance of course,
is where the person
received a lot of money
from somebody who wholeheartedly
wanted to give them a lot of money.
And they did every derivation of this.
But this is of important.
This tells us many things
that extend way beyond
gratitude practices,
which is that, genuine
thanks are what count.
Okay?
We could probably presume that.
But receiving genuine thanks
is also a strong variable
in determining whether or not
we experience real gratitude,
or whether or not it's empty,
regardless of the size of a gift.
So this constrains our
gratitude practices somewhat,
but I think in an interesting
and important way,
you can't make this stuff up.
You can't tell yourself
that an experience was great
or that I got a lot of money
and therefore it justified it,
even though I think that they
give it to me reluctantly,
or my boss hates me, but
they gave me a raise.
That stuff stings for
all the right reasons,
because there are circuits
in our brain and body
that are oriented towards
these pro-social interactions.
And in some sense, what we
are looking for as a species,
what these circuits want, if you will,
is to receive things from people
that are giving them wholeheartedly.
And that tells us that
if we are the giver,
that we better be giving wholeheartedly,
or we are undermining
the sense of gratitude
that someone is going to receive from us.
So we are gradually building up
the ultimate gratitude practice
based on the variety of
scientific literature
that's out there.
And I know that many people
are probably interested
in developing a gratitude
practice that has long lasting,
maybe even permanent positive effects
on their neural circuitry.
So with that in mind, I
want to turn our attention
to a really interesting study.
It's entitled effects
of gratitude meditation
on neural network functional connectivity
and brain heart coupling.
And to make a long story
short and a lot simpler
than that title,
repeated gratitude practice
changes the way that
your brain circuits work.
And it also changes the
way in which your heart
and your brain interact.
You're familiar with the fact
that your brain controls your heart
because you could be
stressed about something
that's perceived with your brain,
and then your heart rate will speed up.
You're probably also
familiar with the fact
that if your heart rate speeds up
for some reason or no reason,
you're probably thinking,
well, what's making my
heart rate speed up?
And that's because the brain and the heart
are reciprocally innervated, as we say.
They're talking to one
another in both directions.
It's a two way highway.
This study looked at changes
in so-called functional
connectivity within the brain
and between the brain and the heart,
in response to gratitude practices.
And as a control they used,
what I think is very interesting,
a resentment intervention.
I think resentment is an apt control
and quite different than gratitude.
To make a long story
short, what they found
is that a repeated gratitude practice
could change the resting
state functional connectivity
in emotion and
motivation-related brain regions.
If I haven't mentioned a
strong enough incentive
for doing a regular
gratitude practice until now,
this is definitely the
one to pay attention to.
Because what they found was
a regular gratitude practice
could shift the functional
conductivity of emotion pathways
in ways that made
anxiety and fear circuits
less likely to be active,
and circuits for feelings of wellbeing,
but also motivation to
be much more active.
I find that remarkable and important
because a number of people struggle
with issues of motivation.
A lot of people who are highly motivated
also have issues with anxiety and fear.
And so this study really
points to the fact
that it's a twofer.
If you have a good gratitude practice
and you repeat it regularly,
you reduce the fear, anxiety circuits,
you increase the efficacy
of the positive emotion,
feel good circuits,
and the circuits associated
with motivation and pursuit
are actually enhanced as well.
So that's very strong incentive
to have a gratitude practice
and one that you use regularly.
We'll talk about how
regularly in just a moment.
I don't want to go into too
many details of the study,
although we will put a
reference to it if you like.
It includes a lot of fMRI data,
imaging data of different brain areas,
many, many tables and examples of matrices
of before and after gratitude,
after resentment, et cetera,
you do indeed have circuits
in your brain for resentment,
whether you like it or not, we all do.
And some people,
just those circuits are
more robust than others.
But the remarkable thing is
one can shift these circuits
in the direction that I
think most people would like;
which is more sense of
wellbeing and motivation
and less resentment and fear literally.
And what's really cool
about this study also
is that the interventions
are only five minutes long.
It's incredible, five minutes long.
And so, as we start to build out
our ideal gratitude practice,
we know that it has to
have certain features.
First of all, it has to
be grounded in a story,
probably a story that you've heard
in its entirety at least once.
But then you can have a shorthand version,
the so-called bullet points
that I talked about before
that allow you to drop into that story
or the emotional
associations with that story.
So you don't have to listen
to the whole story each time.
And that story should be one
in which you are genuinely
being thanked for something
and it made you feel good,
or it could be a story about
someone else genuinely
expressing thanks, okay?
Based on the description
of the gratitude practices
that we talked about earlier.
Your gratitude practice can be very brief.
I mean, it be as brief as
one minute, 60 seconds,
or five minutes, which still
seems very brief to me.
Although in these studies,
they were getting these
really major effects
just from five minutes
of gratitude practice.
Some of these papers involve
people doing some focusing
on their breathing and calming themselves
as they go into the gratitude practice,
but that's within the five minute block.
So if you decide that you're going to do
a gratitude practice
that involves first doing
some calming breathing,
exhale emphasized breathing, for instance,
or physiological size, things
I've talked about before
on this podcast that can help calm me down
'cause they have a lot of
exhales, which you now know,
slows your heart rate down,
and then doing your gratitude
practice, that's fine.
It's actually not necessary,
but a lot of these studies used that.
I think once a narrative has been set,
you've heard the story and
it has meaning for you,
or you have a recollection of a story
where you are genuinely thanked,
then I think just 60
seconds or maybe 120 seconds
should be sufficient.
Then the question becomes,
how often to repeat
this gratitude practice.
That's not exactly clear
from the existing literature.
I can't point to any one study
that says five times a week
or four times a week.
So I'm going to throw out a number
which is three times a week,
and then people will ask,
well, when should I do
that gratitude practice?
And I'll tell you what I tell everybody
about almost every practice
with a few exceptions,
which is the best time of
day to do this practice
is when you first wake up in the morning,
or before you go to sleep at
night, or any time of day.
So we've talked about some
of the neurocircuitry changes
associated with a regular
gratitude practice.
And I should mention
that there's an additional
neurocircuitry shift that occurs.
It relates to a structure that I mentioned
just briefly earlier,
which is the so-called ACC
or anterior cingulate cortex.
This is an area of the brain
that has several functions,
but more and more data
are pointing to the fact
that the ACC is actually
involved in empathy
and is involved in understanding
the emotional states
of others in general,
even if it doesn't evoke
a sense of empathy.
And there are several studies
that point to the fact
that in humans who have a
regular gratitude practice,
the ACC becomes more robustly engaged,
even with these very
brief gratitude practices.
We actually have a project in our lab.
This is actually done in animal models,
where animals observe other animals
experiencing certain emotional states.
And one of the brain areas
that we've identified
as important for this;
it's kind of a primordial form of empathy
'cause we really don't know
what these mice are thinking.
We work on humans, in the
case where we work on humans,
of course we ask them and they tell us
what they think they're thinking.
With the mice, we ask them,
but they don't tell us much
of anything interesting.
Instead we measure a number
of physiological signals.
But the important point is that the ACC,
the anterior cingulate cortex
seems to be an important hub
for the generation and
execution of empathy
as it relates to feelings
and empathic behaviors;
altruistic behaviors of
animals helping animals
and humans helping other humans.
We see this in the animal
models, we see this in humans.
So, if you want to be
a more empathic person,
a gratitude practice
is also going to be very
effective for that, it appears,
especially using this
narrative type approach
where you are using
someone else's narrative
of receiving gratitude
as a way to tap into your
own sense of gratitude.
Thus far, we've mainly talked
about the effects of gratitude
on neural circuit activation,
and changes a little bit
about some of the changes
that are happening in terms of the body,
heart rate and breathing and so forth.
But we haven't talked a
lot yet about the changes
in health metrics, in
things like inflammation
or reductions in inflammation and immunity
and things of that sort.
So with that in mind, I'd
like to describe the results
of a really interesting recent
study that was published
in the journal Brain
Behavior and Immunity.
This was published 2021.
The title of the study is,
Exploring Neural Mechanisms
of the Health Benefits
of Gratitude in Women: A
Randomized Control Trial.
The first author is Hazlitt.
And basically, what this paper showed
was that women who had a
regular gratitude practice
of the sort that we've been
talking about up until now,
showed reductions in amygdala activity;
a brain area associated
with threat detection,
a intimate part of the
fear network in the brain.
So reductions in amygdala activation,
and large reductions in the production
of something called TNF-alpha,
tumor necrosis factor alpha,
and IL-6, interleukin six.
Now, if you happen to have
listened to the episode
that I did on activating
your immune system
and immune function, you heard
about TNF-alpha and IL-6.
TNF-alpha and IL six are
inflammatory cytokines.
These are chemicals
that exist in your body,
and that are released from
cells when there is damage
or kind of a systemic stress;
when your system is in duress.
And in the short-term,
they can be beneficial.
They can call in signals for wound healing
and repair of cells, et cetera,
but you don't want TNF-alpha
and IL-6 levels to be too high,
and you don't want those
levels to be up for too long.
And so, this study is really nice
because they showed significant effects
in reducing TNF-alpha and IL-6
in response to a gratitude practice.
And because they also observed reductions
in amygdala activation,
this area associated with
threat detection and fear,
it's likely, and I
should emphasize likely,
'cause I don't know,
that the direction of the effect
is that there are neural circuit changes,
which in turn shift the degree
to which these inflammatory cytokines
are released in the body.
Although for all I know, it
could be the other way too.
It could be that having
a gratitude practice
shifts something about
heart rate and breathing,
which in turn lowers the
amount of TNF-alpha and IL-6,
and that in turn reduces
activation of the amygdala.
We don't really know the direction
of the effect, excuse me,
but if I had to speculate,
I would speculate
that it was a shift in neural circuitry
that led to a change in
the circuits of the body.
And another interesting
aspect of this study
is that the reductions
in amygdala activation
and the reductions in TNF-alpha
and IL-6 were very rapid.
They occurred almost immediately
after the gratitude
practice was completed.
And even though that study was performed
exclusively on female subjects,
based on the biology and
circuitry of the amygdala
and the biology of TNF-alpha and IL-6
performing this inflammatory
role in both men and women,
I don't see any reason
why the results of that
study wouldn't pertain
to both men and women.
So what about the chemistry
associated with gratitude?
Are there certain chemicals in our brain
or that we could enhance in our brain
that would enhance our gratitude practice?
Indeed, there are.
And earlier I mentioned the chemical,
the neuromodulator serotonin
as having a powerful influence
on the activation of neural circuits
associated pro-social
behaviors and gratitude,
and other sort of feel good behaviors.
To make a long story short,
neuromodulators like
dopamine and epinephrine
and norepinephrine tend
to place us into a state
of external perception,
meaning a state of observing
things and focusing on things
outside the immediate reach of our body
and confines of our skin.
They tend to put us in pursuit,
or in thinking about
things out in the future
or out away from our physical body.
Whereas the neuromodulators serotonin
and some of the associated
pathways like oxytocin
and other neurochemicals
tend to, I want to emphasize,
tend to be associated with
states that are about contentment
with what we have within
the confines of our body
and our immediate experience.
So they're not so much about pursuit,
but about gratitude and about appreciation
for what we already have.
I'd be remiss if I didn't
therefore point out
that if one were to shift their chemistry
toward having higher levels of serotonin,
you would, by all logic,
experience heightened levels of gratitude.
And indeed some people do this.
They will take compounds
that increase serotonin.
There are a number of compounds
out there, as you know.
I'm certainly not
suggesting people do that.
A couple of the supplement based legal,
over-the-counter approaches to this
are things like 5-HTP, which
is a precursor to serotonin.
Some people will take 5-HTP
to try and enhance their sleep.
I'm not a fan of doing that, personally.
I've talked about this
in the sleep episodes.
But the state that we call
sleep has a very complex
and important architecture as
it relates to neurochemicals.
And by taking serotonin by supplement
or by stimulating serotonin
release by supplement
with 5-HTP or with tryptophan,
which is an amino acid
precursor to serotonin,
one can run into the problem
of disrupting the normal
architecture of sleep cycles
throughout the night.
I experienced that as, if I've
taken 5-HTP or tryptophan,
I fall asleep very deeply,
but then I wake up three hours later
and I can't fall asleep at all.
And actually it sometimes
even messes up my sleep
the subsequent night.
Some people are not so
sensitive to 5-HTP in tryptophan
and they actually really like it.
So again, you have to talk to your doctor,
decide what's right for you.
You're responsible for
your health, not me.
And you have to determine
what works for you.
Everyone's slightly individual.
But one could imagine enhancing
their amount of serotonin
in their brain and body by
taking 5-HTP or tryptophan
before a gratitude practice,
that seems a little bit extreme
given that the gratitude
practice is only about a minute
to five minutes long on a regular basis,
but there may be instances
in which you're really trying
to amplify the circuitry
in the brain and body that
are associated with gratitude,
and therefore that might be something
that you want to explore.
There's a new compound that's out there.
A legal over-the-counter compound.
At least it's legal in the United States,
I don't know about overseas.
And that's a compound
called Kanna, K-A-N-N-A.
It's an interesting compound.
It goes by another name as well, which is,
and I'm going to mispronounce
this and I apologize,
this is Sceletium tortuosum.
Please see our timestamps
if you want to see the spelling of that.
But I'll just call it Kanna,
by its other name for short.
It's an herb that is traditionally chewed
prior to stressing endeavors,
is how it's described on an examine.com.
But I looked at some
of the studies on this.
It's kind of interesting.
It very likely increases the
amount of serotonin in the body
and pretty potently.
It is generally taken in dosages
of anywhere from 25 to 50 milligrams.
And it creates a kind of a
pro-social gratitude enhancing,
or I should say gratitude circuitry
pro-social neurocircuitry enhancing effect
because of the ways that it interacts
with the certain urgent
pathways of the brain.
So it also has another name,
it's sometimes called
Zembrin, Z-E-M-B-R-I-N.
Again, I'm not suggesting
that people run out
and take this stuff.
But there is an emerging practice
of people using Zembrine,
Sceletium tortuosum,
also called Kanna, K-A-N-N-A,
in order to enhance the
states that are about comfort
and pleasure with what one has
in their immediate sphere of experience.
And so one could imagine
if it's safe for you and right for you
and legal where you live
in enhancing serotonin
by taking Kanna and then
doing your gratitude practice.
What's the logic behind that?
Well, oftentimes we hear about
supplements and pharmacology
for "increasing plasticity"
or "opening plasticity."
You know, if I had a dollar
for every time someone said,
I hear that such and
such opens plasticity.
Well, indeed there are molecules
associated with the thing
that we call neuroplasticity.
But neuroplasticity is not
an event, it's a process;
meaning it has many, many steps.
It occurs during wakefulness,
it's consolidated during
sleep and so forth.
Taking a substance that increases
a neurochemical in your brain will likely,
provided it's the right substance
and it's the right practice,
will likely enhance the
amplitude or the intensity
of that practice and make
it a more potent form
of inducing neuroplasticity.
Meaning it will create longer lasting
or more robust brain changes
than if one hadn't increased
their chemistry in this way,
this way of taking something.
But that doesn't necessarily mean
that you couldn't get to the
very same place without it,
by simply doing a slightly
longer attitude practice
or putting a little bit
more mental effort into it.
That said, I think the
future of neuroplasticity
really resides in not just one approach,
not just neurochemistry
and taking substances
to increase neuroplasticity,
not just behavioral practices
to try and increase neuro-plasticity,
not just brain machine interfaces
or devices to increase neuro-plasticity,
but rather the convergence
of multiple tools.
So you could imagine enhancing
serotonergic transmission,
as we say in the brain
using something like Kanna,
combined with a gratitude practice.
In the not-too-distant future,
this will probably also be combined
with some sort of noninvasive device
to stimulate the prefrontal
cortex at the same time.
Please don't do that recreationally.
Those devices are for
clinical use only currently.
But I think you start to get the idea.
So for those of you that are
a little bit more exploratory
and you want to go in and
do some reading on this,
I thought you might
find Kanna interesting.
I certainly did.
There are a number of studies
that will pop up on PubMed.
I recommend using examine.com
as your jumping off point.
There are some decent studies
that they described in their
so-called human effect matrix.
So those are studies done on humans.
And the main effects
that have been documented
in the scientific literature are minor,
but significant increases in
cognition, executive function.
Executive function is something
that's also associated
with prefrontal cortex,
and reductions in anxiety.
And that seems to be a common theme
that we're seeing again and again.
You saw this in the study,
the trial where we saw
reductions in TNF-alpha
and reductions amygdala activation.
Which would ostensibly lead
to reductions in anxiety.
You're seeing increases in
activity in brain networks
that are associated with
feelings of wellbeing.
So again, back to that kind of push-pull
of defensive anxiety and
fear-like circuitry in the brain
being antagonistic, as we say,
to the circuits that are
associated with pro-social,
feeling good, receiving good feelings,
type circuitry and events in life.
So as you now know,
there is a lot of science
about how gratitude can positively impact
neural circuits in the brain.
Anti-inflammatory markers in the body,
brain-heart breathing
coordination, and on and on and on.
I'd like to just
highlight the key elements
of the most effective,
at least to my knowledge,
gratitude practice.
And when I say the most effective,
what I'm doing is I'm gleaning
from the scientific studies
I was able to find and
combining the various findings
of those studies into what
I think is a very practical,
and what should certainly
be a very effective
gratitude practice
for all the positive
effects that we described.
First of all, that gratitude practice
has to be grounded in a
narrative, meaning a story.
You don't have to recite
or hear that story
every single time you do
the gratitude practice,
but you have to know what that story was
and what the gratitude
practice references back to.
Second of all, that story can be one
of you receiving genuine thanks.
And the key elements there
are that you are the one
receiving the thanks,
the gratitude,
and that it's being given to
you genuinely, wholeheartedly.
Or it can be a story of
you observing someone else
receiving thanks or expressing thanks.
And that has to be a
genuine interaction as well,
both between the giver and the receiver.
So, those are the first three elements.
What I recommend would be
after you've established
the story that you want to use
for your gratitude practice,
that you write down three
or four simple bullet points
that can serve as salient
reminders of that story for you,
it will serve as kind
of a cue for that story
without having to listen to,
or talk out the entire story.
I would recommend writing down something
about the state that you
or the other person were in
before they received the gratitude,
the state that you were in
or that the person was in
after they received the gratitude,
and any other elements
that lend some sort of emotional weight
or tone to the story.
This could be three pages
of text, if you like,
or it could just be a
couple of bullet points.
I don't think it really matters.
The important thing is that
it's embedded in your memory
and that it's really associated
with this genuine exchange of thanks,
and the receival of things.
I think those are the key elements.
And then it's very simple:
The entire practice involves
reading off these bullet points
as a cue to your nervous system
of the sense of gratitude.
And then for about one minute,
which is a trivial amount of time
if you really think about
it, or maybe two minutes,
or if you're really
ambitious up to five minutes
of just really feeling into
that genuine experience
of having received gratitude
or observed someone else
receiving gratitude.
And then in terms of frequency,
I think a good rule of thumb
would be to do that
about three times a week.
And the time of day doesn't really matter.
I can't see why there would be
any so-called circadian effects of this.
I know some people like
to do a gratitude practice
before they go to sleep at night.
I don't see any problem with doing this
before you go to sleep at night.
I also don't see any
problem with you doing this
on your lunch break or mid-morning
or first thing in the morning.
I can't see any logic for
placing it at any one time of day
and not another.
So I think the most important thing
is that you do it at
least three times a week.
And as mentioned before,
it's very, very brief.
So there are very few barriers
to entry for doing this.
So if we just take a step
back from this protocol
and compare it to what's
typically out there
in the literature, which is,
make a list of all the
things you're thankful for,
recite in your mind all the
count your blessings.
So I think everybody should
be counting their blessings
all the time.
There's always something
to be thankful for.
But in terms of a scientifically
grounded gratitude practice
that has also scientifically demonstrated
to shift your physiology at
the level of your immune system
and your look neurocircuitry,
reducing anxiety, increasing motivation,
all these wonderful
things that so many of us
are chasing all the time as goals,
I think a gratitude
practice reveals itself
to be an immensely powerful tool
for any and all of us to use.
And that should come as no surprise
because these pro-social
circuits for gratitude
are not a recent phenomenon.
Discussions about gratitude
date back hundreds,
if not thousands of years.
What we've done today is
to take the modern science
right up until 2021,
and to really distill from
that the neuroimaging data,
the neurochemistry, the various aspects
of brain-body connectivity,
look at the protocols,
take various subject groups.
Some were done in women,
some were done between two individuals,
some were done with brain imaging,
all the various changes on a theme
that allow us to point to a simple,
but very effective protocol
that certainly we could all use
around Thanksgiving.
But Thanksgiving is just, but one day
throughout the entire year, of course.
I personally have been
using a gratitude protocol
for the last several years.
But that protocol was based
on my ignorance, really,
about the scientific literature,
and was mainly based
on what I'd heard out
there in the internet,
which is that I should
list out or think about,
or verbally recite the
things that I'm grateful for.
The sort of protocol
that we arrived at today
based on the scientific literature
is distinctly different from that.
And as a consequence,
I've started to script out
a protocol identical to
the one I just described,
and I intend to use that going forward.
If you're learning from
and/or enjoying this podcast,
please subscribe to our YouTube channel.
That's a terrific zero
cost way to support us.
In addition, please subscribe
to us on Apple and Spotify.
And on Apple, you have the opportunity
to leave us a comment and
up to a five star review.
Also, please check out our sponsors
mentioned at the
beginning of this episode,
that's the best way to
support this podcast.
In addition, we have a Patreon.
It's patreon.com/andrewhuberman.
And there you can support this podcast
at any level that you like.
During today's episode, and
in many previous episodes,
I mentioned supplements.
Supplements aren't for everybody.
But if you are going to use supplements,
it's imperative that the supplements
be of the very highest quality.
For that reason we've
partnered with Thorne,
that's T-H-O-R-N-E,
because Thorne supplements
have the highest levels of stringency,
in terms of the quality of
the ingredients they include
and the precision of the
amounts of the ingredients
they include in their products.
They've partnered with
every major sports team,
as well as the Mayo Clinic,
so we're delighted to be
partnered with them as well.
If you want to see the
supplements that I take,
you can go to thorne.com/u/huberman,
and there you can see all
the supplements that I take,
and you can get 20% off
any of those supplements.
Or if you navigate into the
site through that portal,
thorne.com/u/huberman,
you can also get 20% off
any of the other supplements
that Thorne makes.
Thank you for your time
and attention today,
learning about the science of gratitude.
And last, but certainly not least,
thank you for your interest in science.
[upbeat music]